Kind of how you grew up and what might influence your right science fiction or to write in general and why science fiction in particular?
Well, I started reading this stuff when I was six years old. Like, you know, most people start sometime before they're twelve.
I started when I was six and actually the first book I read was really amazing. It was Chad Oliver's Mists of Dawn in the old Winston edition, you know.
And I'll never forget that book and you know, and it's real wonderful. Now I'm a friend of Chad, you know, here thirty years later and stuff like never, never thought.
But I grew up reading this stuff when I was a kid and then in the early sixties, I got into through Buddy Saunders.
I got into comic book fandom, which was just starting up like in, but it was like one of the four people in the world who have copies of Rockets Blast comic collector from number one,
which was put out on carbon paper to the four people who subscribe to it or something.
But Buddy got me into comic book fandom originally as an artist. Originally did art. I did like covers for fanzines and you know,
how Buddy and the Art like inked his artwork and stuff like that and started writing. Since I've been reading science fiction all along,
I wrote essentially what is George Martin and everybody referred to back then as text stories, which were the printed stories like you would see in the fanzines and stuff of the time.
Printed stories of like about the comic book characters, except they were written instead of you know, in panel form, they were written out.
And from there, it was just like by the mid sixties, I was writing SF stories and submitting them and getting them back and you know, doing that until I finally sold.
In 1969.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Don't go ahead.
The science fiction aspect and why not westerns or fantasy or romance or something. Why was it science fiction?
Well, because I'd grown up reading it, you know, and I'd gotten away from reading. It's amazing. I'd gotten away from reading while I was writing the stories.
As I went away from reading science fiction, there was a period about three years there where mostly while I was reading, I was in college and I was in theater and journalism,
things like that. I was reading plays and movie scripts and novels and things like that instead of, you know, regular novels instead of SF.
And but I was still writing the SF because I mean, it was there since I was six years old, you know, and it just stays with you.
And that's that's essentially what, well, actually, if you want to know, everybody has a story like this, but I read Lynn Carter's Wizards of Lemuria.
And I said, if he can get that published, I can write, I can get that, you know, I can get my stuff published.
It's, you know, it's real obvious. Like, I mean, everybody, I think has a story about that. They read something after they've been reading this stuff for 20 years.
They finally read something that just pushes their buttons and says, that's garbage, you know, and I can write better than that.
Even when you're 18 years old, you say, I can write better than that. And you set out to prove it.
And a lot of people set out to prove it, write a story and like submitted or don't submit it, just write the story to prove it.
They can write a story, you know, not even writing a story.
So essentially is I got serious about this about submitting it and things like that, you know, and did.
That's why I accept.
I like to ask this question of people that are roughly my age. I'm 34 and the Sputnik and that fallout had a lot of effect on me and what I did when I became an old man.
Did that have any influence on you because science was really something back in the 50s and they really pushed it?
Well, the only surprise was, I mean, if you're talking about the effect like Stephen King talks about in Dance Macabre,
he was watching Earth versus the Flying Saucers and the theater manager came out and said the Russians have put up a satellite and the theater goes,
you know, and everybody was stunned. I wasn't stunned at all.
I mean, Phil Palsett, farmer always says, I got turned off in science fiction when we weren't on the moon by 1949.
You know, I haven't respected science since then because he grew up as a kid to 30s, you know, always expecting us to be on the moon by 1949.
But I mean, I had, you know, I was in the 50s, I was a space freak and a jet plane freak, you know, and call it model airplanes and model spaceships and things like that.
The only surprise was that the Russians actually did it first because we had, you know, said we were going ahead and doing it in 56 and getting serious about it.
It was just that they'd gotten a little serious, a little faster, you know, and then we spent the next three years trying to essentially catch up, you know, and top them.
But I mean, it was no surprise to me. It was good because I thought I would be one of the first people on Mars.
Essentially, you know, you think when like when Sputnik goes up and you're, you know, you're 13 years old, you know, you say, well, good, then there'll be an astronaut training.
I mean, there'll be a space man, space man training program and I'll get in the space man training and we'll be on Mars by 1970, you know, and stuff like that.
But that that was the good aspect of it.
And then like as if you read Tom Wolf's right stuff or talking about, you know, these guys that flew these, you know, everybody thought that we would have the three step rocket in the space station the whole bit.
Everybody that flew the experimental rocket planes and jets thought the guys going to the astronaut program were nuts, you know, because they said, what, get in a can and ride it up and go around and come back down and don't fly it or anything.
You know, I mean, they thought that was just garbage, you know, and nobody knew that's the way it was going to be.
You know, they had the dinosaur project on it, which really, you know, essentially like the shuttle is now, you know, and we thought it'd be like that.
You would fly the thing up and you would fly it back in and you would land it, you know, and things like that and use it over and over and stuff.
But I assumed that I would be one of the, you know, like when you're a kid that hot about stuff, you assume you'll be one of the first people on Mars or, you know, stuff like that, you know, that's what did.
I mean, it just made me, you know, say, well, good, it's going to happen, you know.
Okay.
Lunchbox, as I understand it, was your first published story. How many heads you've written and how easy was it or difficult was it to break in finally to publish?
Well, essentially, I had been, I had been trying to get published since 1966, been serious about it, 65 and 66.
And I'd been publishing in fanzines all along, stories in fanzines.
And I just kept sending the stories out until finally one of them sold.
I mean, there was no, there was no problem breaking in as such.
I mean, it wasn't like a conscious thing saying this is the one I'm going to break in with or I'm going to write a story to break in.
It was just I'd been sending them out and getting them back until one day I sent one out and it didn't come back, you know, Chad came back.
That's, you know, it was like I'd been, I'd been writing for fanzines all along in comic scripts and things like that.
And the, the story just came, I mean, when it was time for it to sell, it's sold, you know.
Okay. Was lunchbox, by the way, did that precede the Viking lander?
In fact, it was, I sold that story in 1969 or not in 69 and 70.
And I sold it four days or I got the letter four days after I was drafted in the army.
And but because John Kimmel, it was sold analog because John Kimmel died in the meantime and everything was in and uproar at Street Smith for four days.
About, or Condon asked for six months or so.
Ben Bova wrote me a letter in 1972 and said, I'm changing all, originally it was called Voyager.
If you remember the Viking, the Viking stuff is all called Voyager.
And the whole story was talking about the Voyager lander and all this kind of stuff.
And Ben Bova wrote and says, is it okay if I change, change Voyager to Viking so you won't look like a jerk?
And I said, why sure, Ben? You know, anything you want.
And, you know, because the technology had changed the, it changed the term, you know, the terminology in the meantime.
And, you know, I'd been in the army and what was that?
You know, I was guarding PX's and stuff, you know, and I, you know, I hadn't been kept up on the change in terminology in the meantime, you know.
But yes, it was, it preceded.
There were, there were several prototype models of the essentially what became the Viking lander all competing for, for the contract in the late 60s.
And the Voyager thing was one of them.
And I've got a, I've got a picture I visited Langley for one of the mock-ups of the, of the original Voyager thing, which was slightly, it looked much the same as the Viking eventually was, but had, you know, longer arm and all this kind of stuff, you know.
But anyway, yeah, it, it preceded the program.
So that's why, you know, the change to Viking was, you know, like fitted into the story, you know.
What, a story of yours that affected me maybe surprisingly much when I read everything was, was Mono no aware, Mono no aware?
Mono no wario.
Wario, I believe is the way the Japanese pronounce it.
I figured it's hard for Texans to pronounce Japanese.
Yeah.
That one where it works, talking about except the past is inevitable, that sort of thing.
That one.
How did, how did, how did that hit you?
Well, this story was one of the easiest stories I ever wrote in my life.
It's amazing.
It like, it came to me one afternoon and I had it finished by like eight o'clock at night and send it off and sold it.
You know, I sent it off to a couple or three, four places first, which rejected, of course.
But it was finally published in Haunt of Horror, the short live Marvel science fiction magazine.
But no, I was just doing, I was reading the Hiroshima, you know, about Hiroshima.
I'd always been interested in, but you know, the atomic, the atomic bomb in, in, in the fact of the atomic bomb, we grew up with it, you know, and stuff like that.
And to, to a lot of people, they sort of, they sort of, they sort of forgot for a while what it was all about and everything.
And I think that Japan is the only nation in the world that has experienced an atomic war.
I mean, it's, you know, that's it.
They're, they're the only ones.
And I was reading all this research and there are several books like the Flowers of Hiroshima and things like that, which, which had been written about the survivors and about the, about things like that.
So Ed Bryant did a story later called the Hippokusha Gallery, or at about the same time, in fact, although it wasn't published too much later.
But there's a fascination with, there was a fascination with, with, with the fact of the bomb and Monon, Mononowari, I was reading about Mononowari, the feeling, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's sort of almost indescribable.
They usually describe it as the sadness of the beauty of the world.
You know, it's like the translation of it about the transience of things and stuff like that.
And it's a, it's a Japanese and it's, it's not a Zen term, but it's almost a, it's almost, it's sort of an alien term to Westerners and stuff.
And Donald Ritchie wrote a series of articles on that feeling in Japanese films, which I just read at the time.
And those influence me, it all just came together, you know, the whole thing about trying to stop the inoligate from dropping the bomb, you know, and like the futility of, of changing it, you know, and because it happened, I mean, even the guy does change things.
He doesn't change that. He doesn't change the fact.
And it really, it, it came to me, like I said, it came to me all at once and I wrote it and tried to get that feeling into the story, the, the feeling that the Japanese were talking about in the story.
And I don't know if I did it, but it worked for me. You know, it worked for me when I wrote the story.
It's thought it was very effective.
Okay, I want to move on. A lot of the stuff you did in the 70s was a collaborative effort with Stephen Utley, with Buddy Saunders, and one of George Martin.
How, how do you collaborate and why did you choose this as a way of writing?
Well, it shows us what happened. It was the Turkey City writers, which had come to be referred as because of Turkey's Turkey City writers workshops.
We, there was a group of us and we all, it's, it's, it's amazing that it happened.
We're all from, we're all from Texas living in Texas and we all published our first story within like six or eight months of each other. It was amazing.
It just happened that way. And we all got, got, got to meet each other at conventions within like six months of our first story is being published.
And we were all writing at the same time. We're all serious about this stuff. We're going to take over.
And one of the ways we did it was we started collaborating with each other and we've do stories on our own, but then we'd also do stories that we couldn't do on our own with the other people.
And it wasn't a conscious effort on anybody's part. I think it just one of those things that just happened, you know, like the Futurians all living in the same apartment.
That just happened, you know, and like, I mean, you know, all this kind of stuff. It just happened.
And we wrote for a period of about the thing about the collaboration with Steve is although they've been appearing up until two years ago, nearly all of them were written between 1972 and 1975.
Like I haven't done but about two collaborations since 1975. It's just that the publishing schedules, you know, are delayed and they like come out later and stuff like that.
And people think that they were just done six months ago, but they weren't. But most of our collaborations of all those people were over by about 75 or 76.
And it's just one of those things that happened. You know, we were just all writing at the same time. We're all right there.
Like buddy was my landlord, you know, he owned one half a duplex and I was any other. And he, of course, he got me into comics fandom 10 years before that anyway.
And some of us were friends. Some of us met each other and became friends and things like that. And it's just that we just we just sparked each other, you know, if you if you had something you were doing and you got through with it and you weren't quite ready to do something else.
You could always, you know, do a collaboration with buddy or with with Proctor or with, you know, you know, anything like that.
And like we just there must have been in space about two years, there must have been 35 or 40 stories come out of the various collaborations, you know, to and sometimes three way collaborations with people, you know, it was amazing.
And it's amazing that it happened and it's amazing that we got so much done on our own too, besides doing all that, you know.
Okay, a voice and bitter weeping, which was done with buddy then got turned into or converted to the Texas Israeli war, which is the only novel so far that the only science fiction novel that you have your name affixed to that.
How did it evolve into a novel? When you wrote the short story that you have a novel in mind?
This is this is another stroke of strange luck. We originally wrote that story before I saw lunchbox even buddy and I did this 10,000 word novella or novel add an alternate chapters, like, you know, as as in the novel as in the first like 50 pages novel.
We tried to sell that thing everywhere and it would not sell.
I did, you know, it got up to the point where the battleship, the battle with the battleship or the cruiser in in Dallas, that was where the thing ended.
And it wouldn't sell anywhere and I went in the army, but he quit trying to market it while I was in the army.
When I came out of the army and I started selling stories and all this stuff and everybody starts selling stories, but he started writing again.
He also took voice and bitter weeping took all my parts out of it in other words half the story just by leaving the parts he'd written in and sold it first thing off to Galaxy.
And okay, and then he sold it to Galaxy.
Judy Lindell Ray was the assistant editor at Galaxy and it just been hired by Ballantyne Books as a SF editor.
The last thing she saw before she left Galaxy was our story and she liked it and she wrote this and she said, I like this story a lot.
Do you think you could come up with a with an outline for a novel?
And if you do, I'll offer you so much and so much.
And we went, oh, wow, you know, so we said, not only do we have an outline, we sit down and like continue the outline as the book goes like in one night.
We said, not only do we have an outline, but the first 10,000 words are already written.
And just like that, we just stuck my parts back in the alternate chapters back in.
We had 10,000 words of the book already.
All we had to do is write another 45,000 words, you know, and they wrote back, you know, they accepted the outline and gave us contract.
And that was, you know, we wrote the book.
That was it was a stroke of luck.
It was just a stroke of luck.
We were it was at the right place at the right time, you know, two weeks before or two weeks later, it wouldn't have that wouldn't have happened.
Probably, you know, that's going to it's what's third printing, third printing.
It's in its third printing.
Now I figured after about 90,000 copies been printed all somewhere, you know, and it's we have, there's the Italian, Spanish and a French edition.
Is there an Israeli edition?
No, there's not.
They saw what they do is they sold the English, they sold the English edition in Israel, you know, as an export thing.
And, you know, it occasionally shows up on the royalty statement.
You know how many they sold in Israel or whatever you overseas, you know, but it's doing that.
I guess Del Ray is going to keep that thing in print forever.
Every four years they reprint it and jack the price up another 50 cents.
You know, I guess they'll keep doing it till 1999 when the book is all outdated.
You have no objection to that.
I have no objection to that at all.
You know, okay, Custer's last jump.
I called it an alternate world story.
I don't know that was just from my little cattle.
It's got an immense amount of detail in history.
The Indians, the war.
You must do a hell of a lot of research and reading and that sort of thing to get that detail and flavor in.
Well, with Custer, since it was written with Stephen Utley, Utley had always been a Custer freak.
He knew all about all that stuff.
I'd always been an airplane freak.
So I knew all about the airplane stuff and we started one night in 1972.
It's like November of 1972.
We started playing, can you top this on the typewriter?
You know, and so Utley wrote this section about part of the second part to call your article.
We're about two pages that he read it to me over the phone.
About an hour later, I rang him back up and read the first three pages of the part of the Smithsonian report about crazy horses airplane.
And we just went crazy from there, you know?
And the story was written in like six days or something like that.
I did a tremendous amount of research in the time between the time we started the story and the time we finished it.
One of the things was it was written in the alternate.
I wrote the airplane part.
Utley wrote the Collier's article.
Steve wrote the twain part because he'd always been fascinated by Mark Twain.
And then I wrote the Testament of Black Man's Hand, you know, the twain transcribes in the story.
And then we both sat down and wrote the bibliography together, you know, did all this stuff in the bibliography.
And it came out, I think it took about a week to write the story.
But it was because we both of us knew certain parts, you know, already had done research in certain areas that we could write the story and use the other research we did as we wrote it to finish it.
But we did research, but we already had a lot of research, too.
But still, you've done just what you've talked about so far.
You've done a whole lot of reading about a whole lot of things.
Yeah, this is like everybody says, and I know it's true.
I researched too much.
I researched everything too much.
Every story I write, I research a whole bunch and then don't use half of it.
You know, don't use a third of it.
Usually something like that.
I like certain research that I want to do on my own when I'm not sure what I'm doing.
So I read a whole lot about the whole subject.
And a lot of that works its way back into the story.
When I know exactly what I want to do in a story, then I get real specific and that research is not as much fun.
You know, because you're saying, I need to know exactly when or exactly what or something like that.
You know, and that's nice because then you got look.
Whereas if you don't know anything, not anything, but you don't know much about the feel, you can just go and get everything on it and just start going through it and reading it and coming across fan, you know, fascinating little nuggets and stuff like that to use, you know.
But I do too much research.
I do way too much research for every story and it's like sometimes the research will take a month and the story will take two days.
You know, it's like.
If it gives it that flavor though, because that's a comment, I mean, time and time again when you're reading your stuff was damn the detail of this.
It's incredible.
If it contributes to that, I don't think it's wasted.
Well, it's not.
It's never wasted.
It's it's it's it's only and it's only wasteful in the sense that I could possibly be doing the next thing down the line while I'm still doing the research on one thing.
I'm, you know, I could be already be through with the story and have it.
But I do the research and it just it just shows up in the story in the, you know, in the story.
Okay.
In the same year, or at least they came out the same year, Mary Margaret Road grader.
It had Indians.
Is there any connection between Indians and the story and Indians and the previous story?
Did that kind of get you thinking about it?
Well, I'd always been fascinated with with Indians and the Mary Margaret Road grader was another one of those stories like mono no worry.
They're about they're about three.
I've done.
They just came to me in a in a flash.
I mean, it was just I've done research on Indians for years.
I'd taken a taking a course in college and in American Indian American Indian literature and things like that.
And but but the story itself just came in a flash one morning early one morning, you know, and I wrote it like in in a day, you know, the whole thing beginning to end, you know, and I knew exactly like it came to me the the entire story.
And it's really amazing.
It's really it's really a rare thing.
And like writers usually have about in her whole career that happens about twice or three times, you know, and I've I've used up to mine.
I know I know, you know, there is really nice when it happens.
But just all the research I've done through the years just just tumbled out, you know, while I was writing the story.
Now that was the story that the change the element of change.
I mean, here a woman comes along and joins and it kind of upset status quo.
And then the bitterness involved that just all came out in one day.
Yeah, yeah, it all came out one day.
It was essentially, I guess, a lot of, you know, a lot of stuff had just been running around in my mind for for months and months.
And what triggered it was that got up early one morning.
I did a visit a friend in Austin and sleeping on the couch and I got up and I put on Bridge over Trouble Water by Simon and Garfunkel.
And between the opening notes and like the end of the first verse, the whole story just went, you know, nothing.
Wow, you know, this is great.
And I guess it was, I mean, if you go back and you if you listen to Bridge over Trouble Water and you read the story, there's no common element at all.
It's just something in the, I guess, in the field or the mood of the song at the time that just brought all that out, you know, it just brought it all completely out.
I don't know where it came from.
I didn't ask. I just I just sent out the typewriter start pounding away, you know.
Yeah.
Okay, but another story without Lee Black is a bit from pole to pole.
That, okay, as an aside, and this is a compliment.
It's it read a lot like farmer to me.
I mean, I just love farmer.
And to me, it was reminiscent of farmer, but but damn it had a lot of detail and research on that.
Well, Utley, Utley had wanted to write a novel when he was about 12 years old.
I think he told me once about Frankenstein's monster in Pellucidar, you know, Burroughs, Pellucidar.
And he'd had that in the back of his mind on his time.
And he had told me about that like when we first met in 1972.
And one day I was reading, I had a couple of books out for I forget what I was researching.
Who knows.
And I read Mary Shelley's introduction to the third edition of Frankenstein.
And I read, I knew about John Cleave Sims, letter to the world about the Hall of Earth.
But what I read was Arthur Gordon Pym.
With the final line about the figure rose up in front of us and the whiteness was whiter than the hue of the snow.
And this is an Antarctica.
And I said, of course, of course, the Frankenstein monster disappears on the ice in the Arctic in 181797.
Actually, in the chronology of Frankenstein.
And he reappears to Pym, you know, like 12 years later, you know, you know, through the center of the Earth.
You know, it was all there, you know, and I called up Steve and I said, we got it.
In fact, Steve was taken off for the 1974 nebula thing.
And I just wrote Robert, Robert Silverberg just written because at one time for a few days, Robert Silverberg had Custer's last jump.
It should have appeared in New Dimensions rather than Universe.
But then he lost the contract on New Dimensions was and moved it to another publisher.
And it would be too long.
So he gave it back to Terry Carr, who had, meantime, gotten another publisher for Universe.
But he just written and said, you know, I really wish you could write, y'all guys could write a story like Custer's last jump farming, you know.
And I wrote him back a letter and says, well, gee, all we've got is a story about what happened to Frankenstein's monster from the time he disappeared in 1797 until he appeared to Arthur Garden Pym in 1828 or something, you know.
And Steve was getting on the plane that night.
And I said, by the way, if Silverberg says he wants the story, just say, okay, Bob, you know, I just pretend like you know what you're talking about.
I said, I'll have the outline by the time you get back, you know.
And so, you know, Silverberg says, I want the story when Steve got there, you know, Steve Cummings says he wants the story.
What are we writing?
You know, and I said here, you know, and I handed him, you know, essentially what would have been his idea since he was 12 years old or something.
But in an outline form, and we, you know, wrote the thing up and send it off.
And Silverberg took it and it appeared in New Dimensions, you know.
But we did, we done a, I mean, I'd done research on Sims and the Frankenstein monster and so had Steve and he'd done research on, you know, all this other stuff.
And he, you know, hollow Earth theories and all this lovecraft.
We put everything in there.
We put everything that possibly could be connected, you know, with Antarctica, the Arctic or the hollow Earth, you know, in there.
And it does read like farmer because we were, we're both real reading a lot of farmer to time.
I mean, that was farmers golden age, you know, like 74, 75, everything Gonzo he'd ever done was hitting print at the same time, you know.
That's why it reads like farmer.
I mean, not, not like his style, but his ideas and stuff, you know, he's throw, we threw everything in.
We just threw everything in and stuff.
It didn't work.
We just threw out, you know, you know, but must have been fine.
Yeah, it was fun.
It was fun.
Some stories are more fun than others, you know, this one was more fun intellectually than the writing of it was.
But, you know, okay, now go to your, to some solo efforts.
Sunup, which was written with a Jackson.
So that's not really big set the same universe, obviously, you year several, maybe centuries apart.
It's hard.
I couldn't really tell.
Are you going to have more stories there later in that?
No, no, no, not at all.
What happened was that Al Jackson, that's essentially Al Jackson's universe.
And it's a great one, you know.
We, Al did all the research or most of the research for Sunsup, which, which I think is still a really nice story, you know, and it was totally ignored.
It came out in the original anthology, which four people saw.
It took eight years for the original anthology to become a paperback.
Nobody saw the paperback, you know, but it's mostly Al's research, but we had a lot of research left over.
So when I started doing Billy Big Eyes, I was contracted to do Billy Big Eyes.
I said, why not set it, you know, at least the, the, at least the communication systems.
Well, all I used essentially in the Billy Big Eyes thing was a communication system.
And you assume that since when Al did all this research, it was great.
He like covered like 30 or 40 years and, you know, and we only concentrated on like the first five years of the thing, you know, and stuff.
There was enough there for a bunch of stories and stuff.
But the communication system I used because it was like exactly what I needed, you know, and I told Al said, Hey, I'm going to, you know, write a story and use this stuff.
And he said, sure, you know, and, but it's, that's, that's the way that they're the same.
It's said in the same universe in that it's, there's a continuity between the two stories.
And I don't think I ever mentioned how far apart the events were, but I would assume about a hundred, a hundred years, something like that.
Like you said, I'm glad that showed.
Of course, nobody ever saw the other story originally when Billy Big Eyes came out.
So they wouldn't know, you know, okay.
Both of these were hard science quota.
So you like to do one of those every once in a while?
I did at the time and I've had people come up to me and say, you should stick with the other stuff.
You know, so, no, essentially those are the two sons up both, both were projects, even though it didn't seem like it.
Both were projects of George, or products of George Zabrowski's editor ship.
Sons up because Alan and I want to do a story for his anthology faster than light.
Billy Big Eyes was originally written to be in Biogenesis 2, which was the sequel to Tomorrow's, not yesterday's Tomorrow's, but is called Tomorrow Today.
Right. Tomorrow Today series from a small publisher in California called Unity Press, which went out of business after I'd written a story and gotten half the money or something like that.
And George paid me out of his pocket.
It was a theme anthology from RW Ettinger's books.
He did two books, one on mankind's future and one on cryogenics.
And Zabrowski was doing theme anthologies around these two books.
And Billy Big Eyes was originally written for that.
But both my things into hard science have been because George Zabrowski wanted a story from me for a hard science anthology.
And it was a challenge to do it, you know.
So I did it.
Still, Billy Big Eyes, although it's hard science, it's a love story, I think.
Yeah, yeah, the, the, oh, there's nothing that says, says that the hard science story can't be a love story or an adventure story or whatever you want to make it.
The thing was that I had to do it within the framework of some of the extrapolations of Ettinger's book.
And the one I chose was was heightened senses and heightened awarenesses and, you know, alter alter alteration of bodily shapes and functions and things like that.
And I chose the increase in range of vision, you know, from like x-ray to, you know, infrared and all that kind of stuff.
And use that.
But I used it and set it on essentially story about loss and stuff like that.
But the only thing I was limited by was the research in Ettinger's book, because I was supposed to choose, you know, a certain facet of the book to write a story from.
Is that, is that pretty common for editors to say, okay, I want a story and these are the ground rules and you build your story in that framework?
That's the only person I've ever done it for is Zabrowski, both times.
And the limit on the first one was it's got to be a story about faster than light, you know, that's not much of a limitation, you know, it just means it's got to be set in a faster and light universe.
And ours essentially only use faster than light for the way the thing got there and the way the thing eventually left.
The story was not about any faster and light drive at all.
But no, most, nearly every anthology I've ever written for has been an original anthology with no theme to it at all.
They say the book is open and we're taking stories and I send them a story and they buy it, you know, or they don't buy it or whatever.
But Zabrowski's is only two theme anthologies that I've ever, ever had a story in.
And it's just because he keeps asking me, he kept asking me for stories, you know, for his anthology, whatever anthology he had open at the time.
But no, it's, it's, it used to be a more, of course, aren't any very many anthologies at all left anymore.
There's only one original anthology left, which is Terry Carr's Universe.
And occasionally somebody will get a theme anthology contract, you know, they go to the, now you got to have, supposedly you got to have a gimmick like,
and the gimmicks that Asimov and those people have been using are the weakest gimmicks I've ever heard in my life, like the Future in Question with all the story titles in with a question mark, you know, like who goes there and stuff like that.
But, you know, I mean, it's a gimmick and the publisher says, hey, it's a gimmick it'll sell, you know, but like it used to be in the late 60s and early 70s,
there were a lot of original anthologies and a lot of theme anthologies, you know, coming out.
And it was common for, it didn't happen to me, but it was common for friends of mine to get there saying, I want a story about, you know, and I mean, narrow, narrow, you know, parameters of the story,
like I want a story set in a city where it used to have a totalitarian government and now it's, you know, now there's a revolution and what's going to happen to all the water supply, you know,
I mean, people, I know people who wrote stories about stuff like that, that narrow, you know, and they wrote them.
And there were good stories besides the fact that they wrote just a story for that anthology.
I mean, if you hadn't known that that was the, you know, theme behind the anthology could have appeared anywhere and you would have enjoyed his story, you know, but there were lots of those in the 60s and 70s.
A lot of theme anthologies came out, but no more.
Okay. I could the mic.
All right.
I have just about my favorite story.
The only thing I can say, the only question I ask here is, gee, where did you get your idea?
Because the history and the, and the detail and everything.
I can tell you exactly who got the idea.
Yeah.
Mainly we're watching the heroes of rock and roll volume two or whatever it was.
And they did a, like a 30 second bid at the end showing two heroes of the fifties, which were Elvis Presley and Dwight David Eisenhower.
And it just showed clips from both their lives, you know, right?
And I said, wow, you know, a world where Ike is, Ike is the musician and Elvis is the politician, you know.
And I tried to give the story to Chad Oliver and Lewis Shiner.
They wanted to collaborate at the time and I tried to give the story to him.
And I said, okay, because Chad's a jazz, jazz music, you know, fan has been from way back and Lou knows everything or is know about Presley.
He wrote a book on Presley at one time, which hasn't been published yet.
I don't think, but he's written several stories, you know, sort of around Presley and he knows a lot about Presley.
And I tried to just give him the idea.
I said, look, Ike is a jazz musician.
Presley is a politician.
Come on, you know, do the story, send it off, make a lot of money, you know.
Right.
And he said, we just can't get past the idea of Ike as a musician.
You know, they just couldn't do it.
They just couldn't force themselves, you know, I mean, Chad is too close to jazz, desecrated like that.
And I guess Lou is too close to Presley to, you know, see the possibilities and, you know, in politics for Presley.
But once they wouldn't take it, I said, well, hell, I'm going to have to write it myself, you know.
So I sit down and wrote it, you know, it's like you, it's just one of those ideas that bothers you to write it, you know.
I mean, and once, once I knew I had to write it, then I'd sit down and I did just enough research on Ike and just enough on Presley to know about how they would be probably about it and wrote the story and send it off.
And Chad and Lou could have been rich men.
You know, I keep telling them, you know, this should have been your story when it came out last year.
I said, should have been your story.
Should have been your names on it, you know, but they just couldn't do it.
They just, they just had a big stumbling block about Ike, you know, did they like it?
Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, they liked it. Yeah. They liked it well enough, you know.
They said they wouldn't have written it like that.
And I said, well, you could have, you know, but yeah, it's just, it's just one of, I have story ideas that come to me that bother me for months and months and months until I finally write them, you know, until I finally write them.
It's the only way to get rid of them. And Ike and Mike was one.
I mean, I don't know where the title, where the title, I don't remember exactly when the story became called Ike and Mike in my mind, but I don't remember it at all, which means it was probably from the very first, you know, the title came with the story, you know, just for some reason.
And that usually doesn't happen either. Either get a title first or, you know, get the title after the story is already finished or something, you know.
Okay. The ugly chickens and the Nebula Award. Is that your best story, do you think?
I have not mixed feelings, but I had no idea when I wrote ugly chickens, how good it was or not. I hadn't written a story for about six months when I wrote that.
I was doing other stuff and I was working on research on other things. And I hadn't written an actual story. So when I finally wrote ugly chickens, I didn't know if it was any good or not.
I really didn't. I couldn't tell anymore. It worked on it so long, you know, I did all this research for the thing like I did six months of research for this way too long for a story.
And then I wrote the story and I didn't know if the story was any good or not. And then I sent it off to Terry and like the thing was that Terry at the time was taking a lot of medicine.
He had a really, he'd wrenched his back and he was taking a lot of medicine and reading for Universe at the same time.
Universe filled up and he said, I'd like to take it but Universe is filled up and all this stuff. And I said, okay, and by that time, Marta Randall called.
He said, hey, I just heard from Terry about the story and I want it real bad and will you take twice as much money for it?
And I said, oh sure, right, you know, so she ran down the hill and got the story from Terry and brought, you know, and sent me a contract.
And like two nights later, I'm walking the house and it's 12, 30 at night and the phone rings and says, Howard, this is Terry.
And I could just see dollars flying out the window. I knew exactly what was going to happen, you know, and like he had gotten off his medicine and one of the stories he had been promised wasn't delivered and the person said, I can't do it, you know,
and he wanted the story back real bad and like he was trying, you know, he was trying politely to get the story back for less money than Marta was going to pay me and all this kind of.
Anyway, I had no idea whether at the time, whether the story was any good or it was just Marta and Terry were not functioning at their, you know, top flight level or something.
I don't know, but I always try to hope that the next story, a writer one down the line is going to be going to be my best, you know, and there's just no, you know, I like ugly chickens.
It still holds up, I think, real well, if that's what you mean.
I went back and re-read it about three months ago and it was still a good story, which is all you can hope for because some of them aren't, you know, or not, not they're not good is that they're not not like you remembered them or wanted them to be, you know.
Okay, Texas or the south or the west or the southwest figure all figuring a lot of your stories.
And it, which is nice because most of them are LA or New York.
Is that are you kind of being a little regionalist here trying to get a little PR or this is just a natural setting.
This is this is like some of the stories like ugly chickens.
I knew is going to be set part of it's going to be set Mississippi from the very first, you know, I knew is going to end up in Mississippi.
And it's first story of mine.
It went back to Mississippi, Texas Israeli war, of course, a Merri Market Road grader, things like that those does call for a, they had to, they had to take place in Texas or Southwestern Senate, you know, and it was just natural, you know.
Some of my stories don't take place much of anywhere, you know, like everybody else is, you know, but it's not a regional thing.
I don't do it on purpose.
It's like whatever the story calls for, you know, for it to happen, you know, like I can the mic is not set anywhere.
It's about every, every, everywhere, you know, stuff like that.
Okay.
Okay, you have the one novel and a lot of short stories.
I know you're working.
I've seen your force that you're working on forthcoming novels, but are you more comfortable with the short story?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, I'm a short story writer.
I, the only reason I'm writing, there are two reasons I'm writing them bones and novel one is I should have written it.
I got the idea for it in 1970, like when I first started writing and it bothered me for 12 years.
The idea bothered me for 12 years to write it.
The other one is Terry Carr came back into the field as a book editor, which is probably going to be the best things happened to the field in a long time, you know.
Because he's real good.
His tastes are, I think, superb, you know, and he came back in the field and he said, I'm reading for ASSF specials again, which, you know, those, that was the line that published Ursula left hand of darkness and, you know, stand on Zanzibar and humanity.
I mean, not humanity prime, but all these great books from the late 60s and early 70s were edited by Terry Carr.
He's responsible for them being, you know, on the face of the earth, essentially.
And he came back in the field and he says, the books are open.
I mean, you know, I got that guy fell six book, I got six books here and Terry will take it and he won't monkey with it.
And it'll appear just like I wrote it.
And if Terry says it's, you know, it's acceptable, it's acceptable, you know, and he's a good editor and all this kind of stuff, you know, and he's been great.
So that's why I'm writing them bones again.
But otherwise I'd just be writing short stories and not making a living, you know, like everybody else.
Do you, do you write full time?
Yeah, yeah, I've been able to write full time for the last year, year and a half, I think year and a half for the first time in my life.
I tried it once in 1974 being a full time writer and ended up all my friends money and starving and things like that.
So I, so I quit but and got a part time job.
But I've been doing nothing but writing since late 80, late, no 81 since 81.
Yeah.
Where are you going to go from here?
Just just see how it goes.
Yeah.
Yeah, I'm going to finish the book and then I've got about while you're writing a book, you get like 10 or 12 short story ideas that are bothering you.
And I had to stop and write one.
I had to stop and write.
I get to Mike, you know, working on a book and I had to stop and write Man Mountain Gentian, which will be out nominee in August or October or something like that.
And I had to stop and write one which I finished last week to send off to Mike Bishops, Cosmopedia, Anthology, he's doing.
And if it takes another six months on the books, which I'll probably write another story before it's over.
But otherwise I'll get the book done and then go back to doing short stories for a while.
Just another short stories for five or six months.
Is there, is there any hope that, you know, we're going to see, can there be such a thing possible as the greatest hits of Howard Walbrook?
There's the problem is nobody's getting short story collections published right now.
They just can't hold sturgeon collections, stuff like that.
Sturgeon can't get a short story collection published.
I don't have much chance either.
You know, but hopefully someday there will be, you know.
Right. We're running out of time.